---
title: On Step Seven
---

Step Seven says we humbly ask God to remove our shortcomings. This has religious overtones and sounds like some entity will take away our defects of character without action on our part (though humbly asking is technically in action). If I don't believe in such an entity, what does this mean?

My Buddhist friend explained it thusly: in Step Six you become aware of your defects and the damage they cause. When you're tired of the damage, you become ready to change, i.e. ready to have these defects of character removed, then each time you find yourself in a situation where you would've acted out in the past you have the choice to act differently.

You can choose to change your behaviour, but it's not actually that simple. You need to be aware of what you're doing, the effect it's having, what you would do differently, how to do it differently… and sometimes your circumstances or conditioning lead you to old behaviours or make it hard to do something different so then you need to become aware of that and figure out how to change your circumstances or your conditioning. This process takes a lot of acceptance, patience, and tolerance. You need to see your actions and their effect clearly, accept that you're doing them, accept yourself even though you're still acting in defect, be willing to continue trying to change even when it's slow, and ask for help. You also need to trust the process, because often you don't have to consciously do anything differently, at least not in a self-conscious hyper-vigilant way. You have to be willing and open to change happening, even if it's not when and how you expect.

In the book When Things Fall Apart, Pema Chödron writes that it's in our nature to indulge and repress our thoughts and feelings. As we practice mindfulness—that is, nonjudgmental awareness—we don't seek to change anything. We seek merely to observe and accept. The more we observe our indulging and repressing without trying to stop or change it the better we become at seeing ourselves clearly and accepting what is. Eventually we find a spaciousness and notice that we don't indulge or repress as much as we used to. We don't have the same need to do so since we can observe our feelings and thoughts nonjudgmentally and have the balance to weather them.

This works because change isn't possible without acceptance. Just as others won't take feedback until they feel you understand where they're coming from, you won't feel safe and willing to change until you yourself understand where you're coming from. You gotta know where you're standing to take the next step. Not to say you can't step blindly. You can, but you might fall in a hole or end up somewhere unexpected.

This relates to “humbly asking”. You need humility to see yourself as you are, to let go of your need to be more than or less than—your need to deny defects or create problems to reinforce a self-image that served you in the past. You need humility to see that it's going to take time to change, even though you're aware of what needs to change. You also need humility to accept that you don't know the answers, that you don't know how you're going to change, what you'll be like in the future, or what behaviour will let you live skilfully. You may have an idea of what the flawless you is like, but the reality could be totally different. You might think that you're a social butterfly made shy by fear of rejection, but you might find once you let go of the fear that you prefer to be alone and what you saw as shyness was actually a dislike of groups. You’d waste a lot of energy trying to become a bold extrovert instead of allowing yourself to make peace with your own company. If you thought you know what the outcome would be instead of being open to possibility by observing what's right in each moment, you'd limit your growth and risk trying to control the process.

Step Seven warns against trying to remove your defects yourself because you're likely to do so with control or suppression, neither of which are spiritual principles. Suppressing your behaviours will blow up eventually, and control creates anxiety. The more you try to control a situation or behaviour the more you’ll notice how it's not working, how things aren't going according to plan. You'll worry that it'll never get better and you'll tighten your grip. You'll miss all the ways the situation could work out because you're focussed on how it isn't going your way, thus you become ungrateful and self-centred. And defects are simply normal human traits blown out of proportion by self-centred fear. 

That's where the metaphor of asking God to remove them comes in. If you ask someone else to remove them, you let go of trying to remove them yourself. Asking God sets the intention to let go of your defects, to change your behaviours, then lets go of the outcome. How and when your defects are removed aren't up to you. You just have to maintain conscious contact with the God of your understanding, which for me means being mindful. As long as I'm nonjudgmentally aware I’ll see myself indulging and repressing and accept it. I'll accept myself and as I become aware of the impact I have, I'll find myself choosing new behaviour.

Not trying to control your defects doesn't mean taking no action. Faith without works is dead. It's still up to you to notice when something is causing harm or unmanageability, or just not how you want to live, and to find a way to change. You can notice a weird feeling in your gut and decide not to repeat whatever caused the feeling. You can talk to people about the way you keep putting your foot in your mouth even though you're trying to be tactful and they can offer suggestions. You can observe that you really want to be a pro dodgeball player and take steps toward that dream. But all of these depend on first seeing and accepting what is without trying to change it in the moment that you observe it. Thus you meet each moment, learn what you can from it, and then seek guidance from your Higher Power, whatever that means to you in that situation.